\chapter{Future Development}

This chapter outlines features, which were considered as optional extension of
the project but were not realized due to time, complexity or other constraints.

\section{Power Management}

The xHCI specification focuses a lot on power management. Devices have multiple
states with respect to the amount of power used, and even links between devices
do. Of course, to fully utilize these features, there must have been
a system-wide mechanism to declare intentions about power management. We're not
there yet.

There are although a few power switches we could toggle just now. Given the
small number of drivers implemented, we could for example make the USB fallback
driver suspend the device.

We consider power management a topic that needs to be addressed on the
system-level, and as such we didn't pay much attention to it.

\section{Asynchronous I/O}

The aspect we care about though is performance. Even when the primary goal of
this project was to allow users to use USB on machines equipped only with xHC,
the performance benefit of USB 3 is not negligible, and could be well worth it.

Every transfer type of USB focuses on different characteristics of the
transfer. The interrupt pipes strive for the lowest latency possible -- in this
field, the synchronous semantics works wery well. The latency between receiving
the interrupt and delivering it is as fast as an IPC reply to a call.

Considering isochronous endpoints, it's simply not possible to satisfy them
with a synchronous API, so we decided to change the semantics to asynchronous
one. The downside of the current approach is that the HC driver is forced to
copy the data out from the shared buffer, because it's ownership is temporary.
But since the isochronous transfers in xHCI are just a proof-of-concept and
there are no drivers for real devices yet, we decided not to optimize
prematurely.

The bulk transfer type can however be utilized both synchronously and
asynchronously, and both have their pros and cons. Synchronous API is easier to
work with, asynchronous could be a lot more performant though. As there is just
one driver using bulk endpoints, we decided not to complicate matters and stay
with synchronous-only API for bulk pipes.

\section{Isochronous Transfers in UHCI+OHCI+EHCI}

The module we implemented in xHCI can be thought of as a generic scheduling
framework for isochronous transfers. The scheduler behaves like a leaky bucket,
scheduling the transfers to xHC at constant rate while throttling the device
driver. This is the most complicated part of handling isochronous transfers,
and implementing an asynchronous API for drivers is a good opportunity to
generify it for other drivers as well.

Implementing the support for isochronous transfers for older HCs is a bit
harder task, though. Those drivers use special data structures for isochronous
transfers, and require the software to schedule transfers so all time
constraints are satisfied. (The xHC does it in hardware, software is just
responsible for issuing transfers fast enough.) Also, because of a heavily
simplified implementation of periodic scheduling in former HC drivers,
a substantial refactoring is inevitable. That however needs a deeper
understanding of inner workings of individual HCIs.
